README.md, before:

# ChatServer-Deployment- COSC349 - Assignment 2
A deployment of a Java TCP chatserver using cloud services, namely Amazon webservices.

# Cloning
This project contains a submodule use `git clone --recurse-submodules git@github.com:skafdan/ChatServer-Deployment.git` to clone with submodule.
### Pulling
To ensure submodule is at the latest change `cd` in to the `ChatServer` directory and checkout to the master branch then pull the changes.
# Dependences
All thats needed to deploy is `vagrant` and the [vagrant-aws](https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws) plugin, and an AWS account.

# Deployment instructions 
Most of the deployment is handled automatically but the vagrant provisioning, some manual interaction is required.
1. Create [security groups](#security-groups) for EC2 and RDS.
2. Create a [SSH](#ssh-keys) keypair.
3. Chmod the keys.
4. Create the [RDS](#database) instance.
5. Update [database endpoints](#database) and credentials in `data.properties` and `setupDB.sh`.
6. Set [environment variables](#aws-authentication) for your AWS credentials.
7. Set ssh-keys in the `Vagrantfile` and the newly created security groups.
8. `Vagrant up` the instance, ssh in, run the `make` command, and then [start the server](#starting-the-server).

Details about these instructions can be found in the subsequent sections, just click the links.
# AWS authentication
The vagrant file uses the aws plugin by [mitchellh](https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws).
To install please use:
```
$ vagrant plugin install vagrant-aws

$ vagrant up --provider=aws
```
A vagrant dummy box file needs to be added:
```
vagrant box add dummy https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws/raw/master/dummy.box
```
Three environment variables from your AWS account, need to be set for your deployment to work; 
- access_key_id, `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`
- secret_access_key, `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`
- session_token,`AWS_SESSION_TOKEN`
### SSH-keys
In addition a `ssh keypair` needs to be created and the private key must be present somewhere accessible on your system.
Ensure the correct permissions are set:
```
$ chmod 400 /path/to/<your keypair name>.pem
```
### Security groups
You will need to create two security groups for the deployment.
The first needs to be for the `EC2` instance and have the following open ports:
- `80` - HTTP 
- `7777` - TCP
- `22` - SSH

The second is for the `RDS` instance:
- Allow all traffic from `0.0.0.0/0` 

Update the ssh-key pair parameters and security groups in the 
`Vagrantfile`:
```
    aws.keypair_name = <your keypair name>

    aws.ami = "ami-09e67e426f25ce0d7"
    aws.instance_type = "t2.micro" 
    aws.security_groups = <EC2 security group>
    override.ssh.username = "ubuntu"
    override.ssh.private_key_path = /path/to/<your keypair name.pem>

```
# Database 
An Amazon RDS - `mariadb` needs to be manually created and select the option to 
create an initial database called `chatserver` also set the username and password.

The endpoint, username and password need to updated in the following locations:
- `ChatServer/data.properties`
- `database/setupDB.sh`
- `database/backup_messages.sh`
- `www/register-account.php`

# Starting the server
Log into the created instance with `vagrant ssh`, then `cd` into the project directory.
```
$ cd /vagrant/ChatServer/
```
Compile with the `make` command and start the server with the provided script.
```
$ make
$ sudo ./startServer.sh
```


## Submodule documentation
# ChatServer
A simple terminal chat-server and terminal client written in Java that uses TCP 
and TLS encryption.

## Dependencies 

- `JDK 16` - Written using `openjdk-jdk-16`, tested `JDk-8` also works.
- `mariadb-JDBC 2.7.3` this can be downloaded using your package manager or directly from the [website](https://downloads.mariadb.com/Connectors/java/connector-java-2.7.3/)
- `keytool` for generating TLS certificate
- `Web sever` - tested with `apache` and `nginx`
- `make`

## Installation 

Install all the required dependencies and run this command to link the mariadb-jdbc connection to your java runtime.
```
# ln -s /usr/share/java/mariadb-jdbc/mariadb-java-client.jar /usr/lib/jvm/default-runtime/jre/lib/ext
```
If you downloaded the `mariadb-jdbc` connecter manually place it into this directory first.
```
/usr/share/java/mariadb-jdbc/mysql-connector-java-bin-2.7.3.jar
```

Git clone the repository and run the make command.
```
$ git clone https://github.com/skafdan/ChatServer

$ cd /path/to/ChatServer

$ make
```

## Usage
Run the installation script `startServer.sh` as root.
```
# bash /path/to/ChatServer/startServer.sh
```
It can also be run with an optional port number, however it will use the port `7777`  if not provided.

```
# bash /path/to/ChatServer/startServer.sh [port]
```

The script generates the TLS certificate and copies it the to default root of the 
webserver `/var/www/html/` to be downloaded by the client when they connect.

### data.properties
The authentication and address for the database are imported using java properties library, as such
a `data.properties` file with 3 key-value pairs needs to be in the root directory of the project
```
host=jdbc::mysql://<address>/chatserver
username=<username>
password=<password>
```

## Database setup


The database requires two tables;
- `user` - A table for users of the database
    - Columns:
        - username: Unique name of the user (Primary-Key)
        - passwd: sha256 hashed password+salt
        - salt: created at time of user creation
- `message` - A table containing log of messages sent
    - Columns:
        - timestamp: uses `now()` function to timestamp messages
        - message_id: auto-incrementing id of the message (Primary-key)
        - message_user_id: sender of message also (Foreign-Key to `user` table)
        - message_content: the message content

## References to resources used
- [SSLSockets - Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13874387/create-app-with-sslsocket-java)

- [HTTP requests java](https://www.techiedelight.com/download-file-from-url-java)

- [Java docs - SSL](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/security/jsse/JSSERefGuide.html)

- [Java docs - SQL](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/8.0/en/)

- [MariaDB JDBC - Arch Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/JDBC_and_MySQL)

- [MariaDB JDBC](https://docs.cs.cf.ac.uk/notes/accessing-mysql-with-java/)

- [Vagrant-aws](https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws)

Commit message:

Update the README to talk about the S3 bucket

README.md, after:

# ChatServer-Deployment- COSC349 - Assignment 2
A deployment of a Java TCP chatserver using cloud services, namely Amazon webservices.

# Cloning
This project contains a submodule use `git clone --recurse-submodules git@github.com:skafdan/ChatServer-Deployment.git` to clone with submodule.
### Pulling
To ensure submodule is at the latest change `cd` in to the `ChatServer` directory and checkout to the master branch then pull the changes.
# Dependences
All thats needed to deploy is `vagrant` and the [vagrant-aws](https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws) plugin, and an AWS account.

# Deployment instructions 
Most of the deployment is handled automatically but the vagrant provisioning, some manual interaction is required.
1. Create [security groups](#security-groups) for EC2 and RDS.
2. Create a [SSH](#ssh-keys) keypair.
3. Chmod the keys.
4. Create the [RDS](#database) instance.
5. Update [database endpoints](#database) and credentials in `data.properties` and `setupDB.sh`.
6. Set [environment variables](#aws-authentication) for your AWS credentials.
7. Set ssh-keys in the `Vagrantfile` and the newly created security groups.
8. `Vagrant up` the instance, ssh in, run the `make` command, and then [start the server](#starting-the-server).

Details about these instructions can be found in the subsequent sections, just click the links.
# AWS authentication
The vagrant file uses the aws plugin by [mitchellh](https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws).
To install please use:
```
$ vagrant plugin install vagrant-aws

$ vagrant up --provider=aws
```
A vagrant dummy box file needs to be added:
```
vagrant box add dummy https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws/raw/master/dummy.box
```
Three environment variables from your AWS account, need to be set for your deployment to work; 
- access_key_id, `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`
- secret_access_key, `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`
- session_token,`AWS_SESSION_TOKEN`
### SSH-keys
In addition a `ssh keypair` needs to be created and the private key must be present somewhere accessible on your system.
Ensure the correct permissions are set:
```
$ chmod 400 /path/to/<your keypair name>.pem
```
### Security groups
You will need to create two security groups for the deployment.
The first needs to be for the `EC2` instance and have the following open ports:
- `80` - HTTP 
- `7777` - TCP
- `22` - SSH

The second is for the `RDS` instance:
- Allow all traffic from `0.0.0.0/0` 

Update the ssh-key pair parameters and security groups in the 
`Vagrantfile`:
```
    aws.keypair_name = <your keypair name>

    aws.ami = "ami-09e67e426f25ce0d7"
    aws.instance_type = "t2.micro" 
    aws.security_groups = <EC2 security group>
    override.ssh.username = "ubuntu"
    override.ssh.private_key_path = /path/to/<your keypair name.pem>

```
# Database 
An Amazon RDS - `mariadb` needs to be manually created and select the option to 
create an initial database called `chatserver` also set the username and password.

The endpoint, username and password need to updated in the following locations:
- `ChatServer/data.properties`
- `database/setupDB.sh`

# S3 Bucket
An Amazon S3 bucket must be set up manually for the backup scripts to function. You can choose whichever bucket name you please, but ensure you update the bucket name in `database/backup_to_bucket.py`. Note that we need not care about the bucket endpoint, as this is handled using the `.aws/credentials` file. 

Note that if your aws credentials expire, the backups will fail on the Chatserver EC2 instance. However, this should not affect the rest of the deployment, and will only cause the backups to fail. To fix this issue, you can update your credentials on the EC2 instance to valid ones.

# Starting the server
Log into the created instance with `vagrant ssh`, then `cd` into the project directory.
```
$ cd /vagrant/ChatServer/
```
Compile with the `make` command and start the server with the provided script.
```
$ make
$ sudo ./startServer.sh
```


## Submodule documentation
# ChatServer
A simple terminal chat-server and terminal client written in Java that uses TCP 
and TLS encryption.

## Dependencies 

- `JDK 16` - Written using `openjdk-jdk-16`, tested `JDk-8` also works.
- `mariadb-JDBC 2.7.3` this can be downloaded using your package manager or directly from the [website](https://downloads.mariadb.com/Connectors/java/connector-java-2.7.3/)
- `keytool` for generating TLS certificate
- `Web sever` - tested with `apache` and `nginx`
- `make`

## Installation 

Install all the required dependencies and run this command to link the mariadb-jdbc connection to your java runtime.
```
# ln -s /usr/share/java/mariadb-jdbc/mariadb-java-client.jar /usr/lib/jvm/default-runtime/jre/lib/ext
```
If you downloaded the `mariadb-jdbc` connecter manually place it into this directory first.
```
/usr/share/java/mariadb-jdbc/mysql-connector-java-bin-2.7.3.jar
```

Git clone the repository and run the make command.
```
$ git clone https://github.com/skafdan/ChatServer

$ cd /path/to/ChatServer

$ make
```

## Usage
Run the installation script `startServer.sh` as root.
```
/path/to/ChatServer/ # ./startServer.sh
```
It can also be run with an optional port number, however it will use the port `7777`  if not provided.

```
/path/to/ChatServer/ # ./startServer.sh [port]
```

The script generates the TLS certificate and copies it the to default root of the 
webserver `/var/www/html/` to be downloaded by the client when they connect.

### data.properties
The authentication and address for the database are imported using java properties library, as such
a `data.properties` file with 3 key-value pairs needs to be in the root directory of the project
```
host=jdbc::mysql://<address>/chatserver
username=<username>
password=<password>
```

## Database setup


The database requires two tables;
- `user` - A table for users of the database
    - Columns:
        - username: Unique name of the user (Primary-Key)
        - passwd: sha256 hashed password+salt
        - salt: created at time of user creation
- `message` - A table containing log of messages sent
    - Columns:
        - timestamp: uses `now()` function to timestamp messages
        - message_id: auto-incrementing id of the message (Primary-key)
        - message_user_id: sender of message also (Foreign-Key to `user` table)
        - message_content: the message content

## References to resources used
- [SSLSockets - Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13874387/create-app-with-sslsocket-java)

- [HTTP requests java](https://www.techiedelight.com/download-file-from-url-java)

- [Java docs - SSL](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/security/jsse/JSSERefGuide.html)

- [Java docs - SQL](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/8.0/en/)

- [MariaDB JDBC - Arch Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/JDBC_and_MySQL)

- [MariaDB JDBC](https://docs.cs.cf.ac.uk/notes/accessing-mysql-with-java/)

- [Vagrant-aws](https://github.com/mitchellh/vagrant-aws)
